Atm&oacute;sfera 18(4), 211-233 (2005)
Dynamics of subtropical vertical motions over the Americas
during El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters
V.MAGA&Ntilde;A
Centro de Ciencias de la Atm&oacute;sfera, Universidad Nacional Aut&oacute;noma de M&eacute;xico
Circuito exterior, Ciudad Universitaria, M&eacute;xico D. F., 04510, M&eacute;xico
victorm@servidor.unam.mx
T.AMBRIZZI
Instituto Astronômico e Geof&iacute;sico, Departamento de Ciências Atmosf&eacute;ricas
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, 05508-090, Brasil
ambrizzi@model.iag.usp.br
Received July 25, 2005; accepted September 26, 2005
[res] Resumen [/res]
En promedio, durante los inviernos boreales (diciembre a febrero), la ocurrencia de El Ni&ntilde;o/Oscilaci&oacute;n del Sur
(ENOS) resulta en m&aacute;s o menos precipitaci&oacute;n en varias regiones de las Am&eacute;ricas. La convecci&oacute;n an&oacute;mala
sobre el oc&eacute;ano Pac&iacute;fico del este y central fuerza ondas de Rossby casi-estacionarias que siguen trayectorias
hacia los Hemisferios Norte y Sur. El llamado patr&oacute;n del Pac&iacute;fico NorteAm&eacute;rica (PNA) resulta en movimiento
ascendente y m&aacute;s precipitaci&oacute;n sobre California y el Golfo de M&eacute;xico. El patr&oacute;n PNA tambi&eacute;n afecta el Mar
Caribe al inhibir la convecci&oacute;n tropical de invierno por causa de la subsidencia. En el Hemisferio Sur, un tren
de ondas d&eacute;bil casi-estacionario se observa sobre el sureste de Am&eacute;rica del Sur que resulta en movimientos
ascendentes y m&aacute;s precipitaci&oacute;n que lo normal. Sobre la regi&oacute;n ecuatorial, la rama descendente de una onda
de Kelvin estacionaria inhibe la actividad convectiva sobre el noreste de Brasil y otras partes del norte de
Am&eacute;rica del Sur. Sin embargo, existen diferencias significativas en la se&ntilde;al de El Ni&ntilde;o de un evento a otro, en
lo que se conoce como variabilidad inter-ENOS. A trav&eacute;s de an&aacute;lisis casi-geostr&oacute;ficos, los movimientos
verticales asociados con ondas de Rossby casi-estacionarias pueden ser separadas de aquellos asociados
con una onda de Kelvin ecuatorial estacionaria. An&aacute;lisis de trazas de rayos muestran que las ondas de
Rossby casi estacionarias con n&uacute;meros de onda 3, 4 y 5 explican parte de la estructura espacial de las
anomal&iacute;as de circulaci&oacute;n sobre la atm&oacute;sfera subtropical, en relaci&oacute;n a los movimientos ascendentes y
descendentes. La fase y la amplitud de estas ondas depende de la estructura del flujo medio zonal y de la
localizaci&oacute;n del forzante convectivo an&oacute;malo, como se concluye a trav&eacute;s de experimentos de sensibilidad con
un modelo barocl&iacute;nico. Un error en la intensidad del flujo medio zonal puede resultar en desfasamientos de los
movimientos verticales y consecuentemente en errores en las anomal&iacute;as de precipitaci&oacute;n simulada sobre las
Am&eacute;ricas subtropicales.Algunos modelos de Circulaci&oacute;n General, como el Modelo del Clima de la Comuni-
dad (CCM3) tienen este problema. Aun m&aacute;s, tiene un sesgo sistem&aacute;tico con movimientos verticales en los
extratr&oacute;picos (tr&oacute;picos) m&aacute;s d&eacute;biles (m&aacute;s intensos) que las anomal&iacute;as observadas, y consecuentemente en
anomal&iacute;as de precipitaci&oacute;n m&aacute;s d&eacute;biles (m&aacute;s intensas) que las observadas. Se discuten los impactos de estos
an&aacute;lisis para las predicciones a nivel regional en las Am&eacute;ricas subtropicales.
[abs] Abstract [/abs]
On the average, during boreal winter (December through February), the occurrence of El Ni&ntilde;o/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) results in enhanced or diminished precipitation in various regions of the Americas.
Anomalous convective activity in the central-eastern Pacific forces quasi-stationary Rossby waves that
follow paths to the Northern and Southern hemispheres. The so-called Pacific-NorthAmerican (PNA) pattern
results in ascending motion and enhanced precipitation over California and the Gulf of Mexico. The PNA also
affects the Caribbean Sea by inhibiting winter tropical convection due to subsidence. In the Southern
Hemisphere (SH), a weak quasi-stationary wave train is observed over southeast South America that results
in enhanced ascending motion and precipitation. Over the equatorial region, the descending branch of a
stationary Kelvin wave inhibits convective activity over northeastern Brazil and other parts of northern
SouthAmerica. However, there are well known differences in the El Ni&ntilde;o signal from one event to another in
what is known as inter-ENSO variability. Through quasi-geostrophic analyses, the anomalous vertical motions
associated with the quasi-stationary Rossby waves may be separated from those associated with the stationary
equatorial Kelvin wave. Ray tracing analyses show that quasi-stationary Rossby waves with wavenumbers
3, 4 and 5 explain part of the spatial structure of the circulation anomalies over the subtropical Americas
related to the upward and downward vertical motions. The phase and amplitude of these waves depend on
the structure of the mean zonal flow and the location of the anomalous convective forcing, as concluded from
sensitivity experiments with a baroclinic model.An error in the simulated intensity of the mean zonal flow may
result in phase shifts of the vertical motions and consequently, on errors in the simulated precipitation
anomalies over the subtropicalAmericas. Some General Circulation Models, such as the NCAR Community
Climate Model (CCM3) have this problem. Even more, a systematic bias is found in the CCM3, with weaker
(stronger) than observed anomalies in extratropical (tropical) vertical motions, and consequently, in weaker
(stronger) than observed precipitation anomalies. The implication of these analyses for seasonal climate
predictions at a regional level in the subtropical Americas is discussed.
[key] Key words: ENOS, Rossby waves, vertical motion, precipitation. [/key].
[sec] 1. Introduction [/sec]
The need for long term precipitation predictions has led to numerous studies on the elements that
control interannual climate variability. Fluctuations in tropical sea surface temperature (SST), as
those observed during El Ni&ntilde;o/Southern Oscillation (ENSO), act as important modulators of climate
in the tropical and subtropical Americas. In the Northern Hemisphere (NH), the Pacific North
American (PNA) pattern (Horel andWallace, 1981) appears during El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters (December
through February) generating positive precipitation anomalies in California and around the Florida
peninsula (Ropelewsky and Halpert, 1987). Over South America, precipitation increases in some
regions of Ecuador and Per&uacute; (Aceituno, 1988), while intense subsidence over northeast Brazil
inhibits tropical convection resulting in precipitation deficit and even drought (Gand&uacute; and Silva Dias,
1998; Kousky et al., 1984). In the Caribbean Sea, El Ni&ntilde;o results in weak convective activity,
particularly over the coast of Central America due to anomalous descending motion. It is not clear
if this is the result of the descending branch of a direct Walker type of circulation or part of the
stationary Rossby wave over North America. Under such circumstances, seasonal climate
predictability in some regions may depend on how influenced they are by stationary Rossby waves
or by direct Walker circulations, their phase and amplitude.
The characteristic El Ni&ntilde;o signal over southeastern South America during December, January
and February, corresponds to enhanced precipitation (Rao and Hada, 1990; Kousky and Ropelewski,
1989; Grimm et al., 1998, Coelho et al., 2002 and references therein). The teleconnection associated
with this climatic signal has been referred to as the Pacific-South American pattern (Mo, 2000).
Relationship between SSTs in the central-eastern Pacific and regional precipitation anomalies led
to seasonal climate prediction schemes (Alves and Repelli, 1992; Hoerling et al., 1995, Maga&ntilde;a
and Quintanar, 1997). Most of them are based on linear relationships. However, inter-ENSO variability
may cause error in the predictions. For instance, although El Ni&ntilde;o tends to increase winter
precipitation, river streamflows and levels of water reservoirs over northwestern Mexico or Uruguay,
inter-ENSO variability may lead to a “dry season” even during El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters (Maga&ntilde;a and
Conde, 2003; Pisciottano et al.,1994).
In northwestern North America and in southeastern South America, inter-ENSO variability is
the result of fluctuations in the phase and amplitude of the stationary Rossby waves emanating
from the central/eastern Pacific. There is some uncertainty, on whether these changes correspond
to real inter-ENSO variability via teleconnections or to internal variability of the mid-latitude
circulations.According to Hoerling and Kumar (1997), the signal of anomalous SST during ENSO
is small in most of the extratropics and therefore, the potential for modestly useful seasonal predictions
based solely on SST information is limited to NorthAmerica.
Quasi-stationary waves forced by enhanced tropical convective activity result in Rossby waves
dispersing over a sphere (Hoskins and Karoly, 1981;Ambrizzi and Hoskins, 1997).The location and
intensity of the convective forcing, along with the structure of the mean flow affect the phase of
such waves (Ting and Sardeshmukh, 1993). General Circulation Models (GCMs) approximately
simulate such large-scale response of the tropical and extratropical atmosphere when observed
SST anomalies are prescribed. However current GCMs, still fail to simulate the amplitude and
phase of quasi-stationary waves, leading to errors in the simulation of climate anomalies at a regional
level (Kumar and Hoerling, 1997; Hoerling and Kumar, 2000).Aphase shift in longitude or an error
in amplitude of the ENSO triggered quasi-stationary waves over the Americas may change the
signal of the climate anomaly at a regional level. This results in reduced predictive skill for linear
regression prediction models and even for GCMs.
The source of error in the simulation of regional climate anomalies in the subtropics requires
consideration of the dynamics involved in the teleconnection pattern, particularly in what corresponds
to vertical motions. For instance, precipitation anomalies over the Caribbean Sea may be related to
a direct (Walker type of) circulation or to a part of the PNA pattern. In the former case, the
intensity of the convective heating over the central/eastern Pacific is directly proportional to the
intensity of subsidence over the Caribbean. The latter is more complicated, since non-linear
relationships may affect the phase and amplitude of the quasi-stationary Rossby wave on the
sphere. An adequate distinction between a stationary equatorial wave effect and a quasi-stationary
Rossby wave on the sphere may help in the analysis of the errors in seasonal climate predictions
over the subtropical Americas.
The objective of the present study is to analyze, by mean of examining vertical motions, the
mechanisms that result in regional climate anomalies over the subtropicalAmericas during El Ni&ntilde;o
boreal winters. The study is structured as follows. In section 2, the data and methodology used in
the study are presented. In section 3, observed data are used to diagnose the dynamics of the El
Ni&ntilde;o signal over the subtropical Americas. Some hypotheses on the importance of the convective
forcing are examined through the use of a baroclinic model and GCM output in section 4. Conclusions
on the potential implication for seasonal precipitation predictions are given in section 5.
[sec] 2. Data, models and methodology [/sec]
a) Data
Monthly mean data from the National Environmental Prediction Center (NCEP) (Kalnay et al.,
1996) have been used for the study of atmospheric circulations over the Americas during El Ni&ntilde;o
boreal winters 1982-83, 1986-87, 1991-92 and 1997-98. These data include monthly means of
horizontal winds (u,v), vertical p-velocities (ω ), geopotential height (Z) and temperature (T) fields
on 2.5° × 2.5° longitude-latitude grids for the December, January and February periods. For diagnostic
analyses, monthly mean anomalies were constructed subtracting the climatological means (1979-
1995) from each field.
Using 300 mb winds, streamfunction fields (ψ ) were calculated using the relationship ∇ 2
ζ = ψ
with ζ the relative vorticity.
Monthly mean global precipitation fields, from the NCEP reanalysis were also used. Although
these precipitation fields reflect the structure of precipitation anomalies in the subtropics, some
differences exists between the corresponding associated diabatic heating and other reanalysis,
particularly in the central Pacific (Nigam et al., 2000). Monthly mean Sea Surface Temperature
(SST) data for the same periods on 2.5° × 2.5° grids were also used (Reynolds and Smith, 1994).
Finally, output (ensemble means) from numerical experiments with the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Community Climate Model 3 (CCM3) were used (http://
www.cdc.noaa.gov/Composites/CCM/). These experiments correspond to the T42 version of the
model, forced with observed SSTs for the 1950 -1999 period.
b) Methodology
To determine the remote signal of ENSO over the subtropical Americas, the dynamics of quasi-
stationary waves is examined based on quasi-geostrophic arguments that relate ψ and ω . Using to
the Q-vector form of the ω -equation (Hoskins et al., 1978):
The vertical motion in an f - plane is forced only by the divergence of Q (Holton, 1992). In this
way, vertical motions associated with forced extratropical quasi-stationary waves are separated
from those of tropical origin (direct circulations). The f-plane approximation may introduce some
errors far from the latitude of reference. However, this is an important element of analysis since
the extratropical dynamics of the teleconnections over theAmericas may be more clearly identified
in relation to stationary Rossby waves dispersing on the sphere.
Previous studies on atmospheric teleconnection patterns have shown that linear wave theory
may explain some of the observed low-frequency atmospheric variability (Hoskins and Karoly,
1981). The climatological DJF basic flow and the preferred trajectories followed by Rossby waves
may be examined through the use of a simple barotropic model as in Hoskins andAmbrizzi (1993).
To analyze Rossby wave dispersion, the ray path radius of curvature is used, given by the expression
2
S
S
K
r
dK
k
dy
=
⎛ ⎞
⎜ ⎟
⎝ ⎠
where k is the zonal wavenumber, KS
= ( b *
/ U )1/2
is the stationary wavenumber, with β* the
poleward gradient of absolute vorticity and U is the mean zonal wind. From a global distribution of
KS
, it is possible to identify the preferred propagation paths of Rossby waves for various mean
flows. Ray tracing is based on the integration of the differential equations,
4
2
2
K
k
dt
dx β
=
4
2
K
kl
dt
dy β
=
and
using a second-order Runge-Kutta scheme for a given initial position, wavenumber and frequency.
Here, b is the meridional gradient of absolute vorticity, k and l are the zonal and meridional
wavenumbers, and K2
= k2
+ l2
, is the square of the total wavenumber.
The agreement between the ray paths and numerical solutions of a linearized barotropic model
indicates that the essential characteristics of Rossby wave propagation over the sphere are retained
with
2 2 2 2
0 / 2f pσ∇ ω+ ∂ ω ∂ =− ∇⋅Q
1 2( , ) ( / / , / / )Q Q R p x T R p y T≡ = − ∂ ∂ ⋅∇ − ∂ ∂ ⋅∇g gQ V V
by the rays. Stationary Rossby wave theory has successfully explained some observed teleconnection
patterns (Hsu and Lin, 1992;Ambrizzi et al., 1995). However, stationary and low-frequency Rossby
waves do not necessarily coincide, particularly when phase speed is considered (Karoly, 1983;
Yang and Hoskins, 1996). For simplicity, a stationary Rossby wave will be assumed in the present
analysis. Its dispersion will be related to the structure of the mean flow.
On the other hand, the characteristics of the tropical convective anomalies in the central Pacific
during thefourEl Ni&ntilde;o events will be examinedusingtheverticalvelocity, w,sincethethermodynamic
energy equation in the tropics reduces to a diagnostic relationship:
N2
w = H
with H the diabatic heating and N2
the Brunt-Väisalla frequency. ω ≅ -r r g w , provides a good
indication of the horizontal and vertical structure of the convective forcing.
c) Baroclinic model
To test to what extent stationary Rossby wave phase and amplitude are determined by the location
and spatial structure of the forcing, some numerical experiments with a baroclinic model are
conducted, with prescribed convective forcing. The baroclinic model used in the present study was
originally developed by Hoskins and Simmons (1975), and extensively used in the study of large
scale circulations forced by convective sources (Ambrizzi and Hoskins, 1997). It is a primitive
equation model with a global domain, spectrally truncated with a total zonal wavenumber 31 (T31)
and 15 vertical levels. The model includes horizontal and vertical diffusion and Newtonian cooling
(see Jin and Hoskins 1995, for details). As initial conditions in the baroclinic model, Z, u, v, and T,
from NCEP reanalysis are used.
[sec] 3. Observational analysis [/sec]
a) Tropical convective activity, circulation anomalies and SSTs
The average of four El Ni&ntilde;o events shows quasi-stationary Rossby waves spanning poleward from
the central Pacific in the upper troposphere as a result of anomalously intense convective activity
(Fig. 1). A well defined wave, proceeding towards North America produce positive precipitation
anomalies over the western coast of the US, northwestern Mexico, the Gulf of M&eacute;xico and Florida.
Diminished convective activity is observed to the northern and western flanks of the positive SST
anomaly over the central Pacific and over the Caribbean Sea. A weaker wave train towards South
America results in positive precipitation anomalies over northern Argentina and southern Brazil.
There is a slight indication of negative precipitation anomalies in some parts of central and southern
Brazil.
The divergence (convergence) of the Q- vector shows regions of vertical quasi-geostrophic
descending (ascending) motion (Fig. 2). When compared with the anomalous p-vertical velocity,
regions of vertical motion forced by the quasi-stationary Rossby waves that extend into the subtropics
and midlatitudes may be distinguished from those related to direct circulations (stationary Kelvin
modulated by the stationary Rossby waves vertical motions (Fig. 4). For instance, during 1982-83
and 1997-98 (Figs. 4a and 4d) regions of ascending and descending motion over the west coast of
USA and Caribbean region resemble each other. However, when compared with 1986-87 and
1991-92 El Ni&ntilde;o events, a weak convective forcing in the central Pacific resulted in changes in the
location (~5°) of vertical motions, in the NH and the SH subtropicalAmericas (Fig. 4b and 4c). For
instance, while positive precipitation anomalies existed in southeastern SouthAmerica in 1997-98,
negative precipitation anomalies occurred in 1986-87. Similar contrasts may be observed over
northwestern M&eacute;xico. These slight changes in phase of the PNA pattern may lead to erroneous
seasonal predictions at a regional level.
Fig. 3. Vertical cross-section of Omega along the equator and the SSTs anomalies from 10o
N to 30o
S for the
El Ni&ntilde;o years of: (a) 82-83; (b) 86-87; (c) 91-92; and (d) 97-98. The contour interval for the Omega field is 0.02
Pa/s and for the SSTs is 1°C.
b) Stationary wavenumber analysis
It is clear that not all El Ni&ntilde;o events result in similar regional climate anomalies. Most diffrences in
ENSO teleconnections are related to the phase of the forced stationary Rossby waves which is
related to the structure of the zonal flow and the characteristics of the forcing (Hoerling et al.,
1995; Ting et al.,1996). The dominant signals in the zonally averaged 300 hPa zonal wind are the
westerly jet streams with maxima between 30° and 40°N and between 40o
and 50o
S (Fig. 5). The
intensity of the subtropical jets during strong El Ni&ntilde;o events (1982-83 and 1997-98) is larger than
during weak El Ni&ntilde;o years (1986-87 and 1991-92) or the long term mean. These differences in
intensity in the upper level westerly affect trajectories followed by the planetary waves triggered
by equatorial heat sources.
Fig. 4. Precipitation anomalies (mm) and divergence of the Q vector at 250 mb for the El Ni&ntilde;o years of: (a)
82-83; (b) 86-87; (c) 91-92; and (d) 97-98. The contour interval is 1 mm and the gray scale is given at the
bottom of the picture.
∇⋅
During El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters, an empirical determination suggests that quasi-stationary waves
describing great circles appear to be related to wavenumbers 3, 4 and 5 (Fig. 6). The turning point
of most rays is located around 30o
to 40o
N in the NH and 30o
to 50o
S in the SH. These trajectories
coincide with the regions of the maximum amplitude of the subtropical jets (Fig. 5). As shown by
Hoskins and Karoly (1981), the ray tracing technique shows that the quasi-stationary waves propagate
poleward from the source until they reach a latitude where Ks
= k. At this latitude, they refract
back to the tropics and propagate in a more meridional direction as they approach the critical
latitude (uc
= 0). Small wavenumber packets propagate rather slowly in a more meridional direction,
while larger wavenumber packets propagate more zonally and more rapidly.
For the present ray tracing analysis, the Rossby wave source was determined empirically in a
region outside the easterlies, at a point where the ray path adjusts to the wave trains. In this way,
zonal wavenumbers 3, 4 and 5 better adjust to the quasi-stationary waves over the Americas (Fig.
6). This is the case of zonal wavenumber 3 over the SH in 1982-83 and 1997-98. During 1986-87
and 1991-92, wavenumbers 4 and 5 appear to become more important (Fig. 5). The intensification
Fig. 5. Climatological DJF zonally averaged zonal wind (ms-1
) at 300 hPa for the NCEP observations and the
El Ni&ntilde;o years of 1982-83, 1986-87, 1991-92 and 1997-98. The line representation of each flow is given at the
top right side of the picture.
Fig. 6. Streamfunction anomaly at 250 hPa for four different El Ni&ntilde;o years: (a) 82-83, (b) 86-87, (c) 91-92, and
(d) 97-98. In each picture it is shown the ray path for the zonal wavenumbers 3 (circle), 4 (triangle) and 5
(square) (see text for details). The contour interval of the streamfuction is 5•105
s-1
.
of larger zonal wavenumbes results in larger spatial variability in the circulation anomalies. In this
way, anomalous precipitation may occur not only over northwestern M&eacute;xico, but also in its central
part. In the SH midlatitudes, weak El Ni&ntilde;o years, appear to result in amplified zonal wavenumbers
4 and 5 and more variable spatial patterns of the precipitation anomalies.
The analysis of trajectories of the quasi stationary waves during El Ni&ntilde;o events leads to conclude
that the structure of the SST anomalies and the characteristics of the convective activity anomaly
in the central Pacific, as well as the intensity of the mean zonal flows are important in determining
the dominant wavenumbers of the ENSO extratropical response over the Americas. It appears that
the stronger the anomaly in SST, the lower the wave numbers of the resulting circulation anomalies,
especially over the SH. The ray tracing analysis also suggests that the wave train dispersion is
affected by the zonal flow structure, i.e. the intensity of the subtropical westerly jets, which is also
determined by the amplitude of the SST anomaly in the central Pacific. This may be explored
through some basic numerical experiments with a baroclinic model.
[sec] 4. Numerical experiments [/sec]
a) Baroclinic model
The spatial characteristics (location, vertical structure, intensity) of the anomalous convective heating
over the central Pacific affects the extratropical atmospheric response. Based on the previous
observational analysis, quasi-stationary Rossby waves generated during strong ENSO years, as
1982-83 and 1997-98, resulted in dominant long quasi-stationary waves (Fig. 4a, 4d and Fig. 6a, 6d).
During 1986-87 and 1991-92, a weak convective forcing in the central Pacific resulted in higher
zonal wavenumbers over the Americas subtropics and extratropics (Fig. 4b, 4c). A number of
experiments using a baroclinic model were carried out to sequentially test the El Ni&ntilde;o extratropical
response of the atmosphere to various horizontal structures and position of a heat source.
For the numerical experiments, a three dimensional climatological basic state for December,
January and February has been constructed without including the ENSO years. In this way,
reinforcement of a pre-existing El Ni&ntilde;o conditions is avoided. One of the experiments consisted on
running a baroclinic model perturbed with a with a heat source centered at (140°W, 0°) for 15 to 20
days, until a quasi-stationary circulation was reached (Fig. 7a). A thermal forcing with a elliptical
horizontal shape, and a vertical structure with a maximum of 4°K at 400 mb was used to represent
anomalous convective activity during El Ni&ntilde;o events. In a similar experiment, the convective forcing
was moved eastward to (160°W, 0N) to show the impact on extratropical circulations (Fig. 7b).As
the position of the convective forcing varied in longitude from east to west, the phase of the quasi-
stationary wave in the NH varied around 10° in longitude. When the center of the heat source was
located at (160°W, 0°), as during weak El Ni&ntilde;os the phase of the stationary wave patterns over the
NH, displaced westward (~10° in longitude). In the SH, the phase of the stationary Rossby wave
did not change significantly. However, Coelho et al. (2002) have shown SST anomalies around
140°W, 0°N have the largest influence in the South American precipitation during warm ENSO
events.
The horizontal structure of the thermal forcing was also examined through a number of sensitivity
tests, with elliptical shapes, zonally elongated. For instance, when the eccentricity, e, of the forcing
(at 140°W, 0°N) changes from ε = 1/2 (Fig. 7a) to ε =1/6 (Fig. 7c), the phase of the quasi-
stationary circulations over North America exhibits only minor changes. Under a more elongated
forcing, a slight eastward shift of the cyclonic circulation over the Gulf of M&eacute;xico is observed. Over
South America there appear to be no major changes in the phase of the stationary wave as the
eccentricity of the forcing varies. Consequently, additional elements, as the intensity of the mean
zonal flow, should determine the inter ENSO variability over the SH. A more complex model with
varying mean zonal flow should be used for this analysis.
Fig. 7. Streamfunction anomaly at 250 hPa for the baroclinic experiments with a elliptical heating at the
equator and Dec-Feb climatological basic state (without including El Ni&ntilde;o years) for the day 15 of integration
and at the longitudes and eccentricities - ε (a) 140° W (ε = 1/2); (b) 160° W (ε =1/2), and (c) 140° W (ε =1/6).
The contour interval is 2•105
s-1
.
a
b
c
In terms of the vertical structure of the convective heating, when such forcing is maximum in
the lower troposphere (700 mb), the tropical response is stronger than when the convective heating
is maximum at 400mb, i.e., there is a more intense Walker type of circulation. However, in the
extratropics the response to anomalous heating in the lower troposphere is weaker when maximum
heating is located in the upper troposphere (Fig. 8). In this way, more intense vertical motions occur
in the PNA region when the heating is concentrated in the upper troposphere.
If a more complex model is used for seasonal climate predictions, it should reflect the sensitivity
of the teleconnection patterns to the location as well as the spatial and vertical structure of the
convective forcing through an adequate prescription or simulation of the SST anomalies in the
central Pacific. Such model should project the tropical anomalies in convection as changes in the
intensity of the subtropical upper troposphere jets, which implies an adequate meridional transport
of angular momentum. The CCM3 has been used to simulate the global atmospheric response to
observed monthly SSTs. This is therefore, a good opportunity to test the sensitivity of this model to
various SST patterns and its response in the extratropics. The quality of the simulation may well
serve to measure its potential to predict regional climate anomalies during El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters.
b) CCM3
As in the observational analyses, precipitation and Q-vector divergence anomalies obtained from
ensemble mean output data from CCM3 runs for various El Ni&ntilde;o events is examined (Fig. 9). In
Fig. 8. Omega field (Pa/s) at 500 hPa obtained from the difference between the experiment with a vertical
heating maximum around 700 hPa and the one with at 400 hPa (Fig. 7a). The contour interval is 0.2.
each case, positive and negative precipitation anomalies over the tropical region are reasonably
simulated, although there is a tendency for the model to produce excessive heating (cooling) over
the SST anomaly (flanks of the SST anomaly) in the central Pacific (Nigam et al., 2000). This
anomalously intense Hadley type of circulation results in more intense ascending and descending
motions in the tropical region, and a more intense stationary equatorial Rossby wave. However,
ascending and descending motions in the extratropics show weaker amplitudes and some phase
shifting with respect to the observed fields. For instance, the descending motion over the Caribbean
region is displaced southward for the 82-83, 91-92 and 97-98 episodes (Figs. 9a, 9c and 9d) and is
missing during the 86-87 boreal winter (Fig. 9b). Over southeastern South America the ascent
motion is not properly simulated in any of the four events. The problem with such weak extratropical
signals may be in part related to the vertical structure of the thermal forcing. The CCM3 tends to
Fig. 9. Same as Fig.4, but for the CCM3 output data.
exhibit a “botton heavy” structure in equatorial heating anomalies (Nigam et al. 2003) which, as
shown in the baroclinic model experiments, tends to produce weaker extratropical circulations.
The zonally averaged 300 hPa zonal wind for the El Ni&ntilde;o cases simulated by CCM3 (Fig. 10) is
similar to the observed one (Fig. 5), but differences in the amplitude in the SH subtropical westerly
jet exist (~ 5 ms-1
), as well as in the NH during the 1991-92 El Ni&ntilde;o events (~ 2 ms-1
). The impact
of such differences in the intensity of the mean flow on the teleconnection patterns may be assessed
by ray tracing analysis.
The anomalous streamfunction at 300 hPa and the corresponding ray tracing for the wavenumbers
3, 4 and 5 approximately agrees with observations (Fig. 11). However, some differences exist. For
instance, in the SH, wavenumber 3 appears to dominate in all El Ni&ntilde;o cases, independently of the
characteristics of boundary tropical forcing (SST anomaly). This result is in agreement with previous
general circulation model experiments which found only a weak extratropical sensitivity to changes
in tropical Pacific SSTs from one El Ni&ntilde;o event to another (e.g., Geisler et al., 1985; Kumar and
Hoerling, 1997). In the Northern Hemisphere, the trajectories for wavenumbers 4 and 5 are quite
similar to the observed ones, but wavenumber 3 shows a completely different trajectory in all Ni&ntilde;o
events. The great circle described by wave number 3 is substantially larger than the observed one.
Probably due to the structure of the upper troposphere zonal flow in CCM3. It should be noted that
Fig. 10. Same as Fig.5, but for the CCM3 output data.
in most cases in CCM3, the empirically determined Rossby wave sources do not coincide with the
observed ones, reflecting that the extratropical response phase may be affected due to inadequacies
in the representation of anomalous convective activity in the SH.
Errors in the phase and amplitude of the large scale circulation anomalies may limit the ability of
Regional Climate models to adequately simulate regional climate. CCM3 does not exactly reproduce
the intensity of the subtropical vertical motions and consequently, it does not generate the observed
anomalous precipitation anomalies, since w in CCM3s tends to be too large in the tropics and too
small in the extratropics .
[sec] 5. Summary and concluding remarks [/sec]
The most common and simple seasonal forecast precipitation schemes are based on statistical
Fig. 11. Same as Fig. 6, but for the CCM3 output data.
models that use El Ni&ntilde;o signal as input. The skill of this method, as an operational tool, has not been
fully assessed, since the number of cases is limited. However, there is substantial inter ENSO
variability, particularly at a regional level, that may limit the ability of regression models to predict
climate anomalies during El Ni&ntilde;o boreal winters at a regional level.
In the present study, the impact of El Ni&ntilde;o in the boreal winter precipitation of the subtropical
Americas has been examined. The occurrence of El Ni&ntilde;o generally reflects as enhanced or weaker
precipitation caused by anomalous vertical motion associated with quasi-stationary Rossby waves.
Changes in the spatial structure (phase and amplitude) of these quasi-stationary Rossby waves re-
sult in inter-El Ni&ntilde;o variability over the subtropical Americas. Observational analyses combined
with a simple baroclinic model experiments demonstrate that the location and horizontal structure
of the anomalous convective forcing in the central and eastern Pacific can affect the phase and
amplitude of the quasi-stationary circulations. The vertical structure of the anomalous heat source
also affects the amplitude of the extratropical anomalous circulations. A weak thermal forcing
leads to an extratropical response composed of various wavenumbers (k = 3, 4 and 5) as in the
1986-87 and 1991-92 ENSO events. On the other hand, a strong El Ni&ntilde;o forcing results in a smaller
dominant wavenumber in the extratropics, as in 1982-83 or 1997-98.
The importance of the location and spatial structure of the Pacific SST anomalies during ENSO
warm events was also verified based on baroclinic model integrations. When the forcing eccentricity
is diminished (more elongated meridionally), more energy is transferred to the extratropics.
Ray tracing analyses showed that the phases of the quasi-stationary waves are affected by the
structure of the mean flow. A small error in the simulation of the zonal wind flow can modify the
wave propagation trajectories from the heat source. The debate about external and internal
atmospheric variability is not a closed subject. There is a clear difference between the wave
trajectories from one El Ni&ntilde;o event to another. This result suggests that the generation of the zonal
mean zonal wind variability induced by the tropical SST anomalies is more important than previously
thought.
There are other aspects of the tropical forcing that deserve to be explored in order to examine
the response of the subtropical atmosphere during ENSO years. Some baroclinic model experiments
have shown the intensity of the vertical motion in the subtropics may be sensitivity to variations in
the level of maximum heating in the equatorial central Pacific. Since the characteristics of the
thermal forcing are largely in correspondence with the structure of the SST anomaly, one may
expect that if SST anomalies are accurately given, our possibilities of getting accurate long term
forecasts should substantially increase to the extent of predicting some basic features of regional
climate. At present, this is not the case, and neither the intensity nor the spatial patterns of the SST
anomalies are accurately predicted.Adjustments of rays for the Rossby waves emanating from the
central Pacific in the CCM3 suggests that the Rossby wave forcing is not well simulated, which
may lead to errors in the phase and intensity of the PNA pattern during weak El Ni&ntilde;o events.
General Circulation Models, such as the CCM3, are commonly used for seasonal climate
predictions. The systematic errors in the models should be taken into account when the predictions
are interpreted at a regional level. For instance, the structure of the subtropical mean zonal flow
should be accurately reproduced by the model, otherwise it may lead to erroneous dispersion in
quasi-stationary waves over theAmericas, and therefore to errors in the location of the precipitation
anomalies. Seasonal forecasts have become an important element in the planning of socioeconomic
activities such as, water management, agriculture or disaster prevention. The demand for more
accurate regional climate forecasts is increasing. Our ability to deliver such products will largely
depend on a better understanding of El Ni&ntilde;o impacts, and even more, on the inter-ENSO variability.
Acknowledgments
TercioAmbrizzi has been supported by CNPq (proc. 302459/2002-2) and FAPESP. V&iacute;ctor Maga&ntilde;a
was financially supported by PAPIIT-UNAM and CONACyT projects. The joint work is the result
of the Collaborative Research Network (IAI-CRN73).
[ref] References [/ref]
Aceituno, P., 1988. On the functioning of the Southern Oscillation in the South American sector.
Part l: Surface climate. Mon.Wea.Rev. 116, 505-524.
Acker, T. L., L. E. Buja, J. M. Rosinski and J. E. Truesdale, 1996. User’s Guide to NCAR CCM3.
NCAR Techinical Note, NCAR/TN-421+IA, 155 p.
Alves, J. M. B. and C.A. Repelli, 1992. Variabilidade pluviom&eacute;trica no setor norte do nordeste e os
eventos El Ni&ntilde;o-Oscilação Sul. Rev. Bras. Meteo. 7, 583-592.
Ambrizzi, T., B. J. Hoskins and H.-H. Hsu, 1995. Rossby wave propagation and teleconnection
patterns in the austral winter. J. Atmos. Sci. 52, 3661-3672.
Ambrizzi,T., and B. J. Hoskins, 1997. Stationary Rossby wave propagation in a baroclinic atmosphere.
Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 123, 919-928.
Coelho C.A. S., C. B. Uvo and T.Ambrizzi, 2002. Exploring the impacts of the tropical Pacific SST
on the precipitation patterns over SouthAmerica during ENSO periods. Theor. and Appl. Climat.
71, 185-197.
DeWeaver, E. and S. Nigam, 2002. Linearity in ENSO´s atmospheric response. J. Climate 15,
2446-2461.
Diaz,A. F., C. D. Studzinski and C. R. Mechoso, 1998. Relationship between precipitation anomalies
in Uruguay and Southern Brazil and Sea SurfaceTemperature in the Pacific andAtlantic Oceans.
J. Climate 11, 251-271.
Gand&uacute;, A. W. and P. L. Silva Dias, 1998. Imparct of tropical heat sources on the South American
tropospheric upper circulation and subsidence. J. Geoph. Res. 103, 6001-6015.
Geisler, J. E., M. L. Blackmon, G. T. Bates and S. Munoz, 1985. Sensitivity of January climate
response to the magnitude and position of equatorial Pacific sea surface temperature anomalies.
J. Atmos. Sci. 42, 1037-1049.
Gill, A. E., 1980. Some simple solutions for heat-induced tropical circulation. Quart .J. R. Meteor.
Soc. 106, 447-462.
Grimm, A. M., S. E. T. Ferraz and Gomes, J., 1998. Precipitation anomalies in southern Brazil
associated with El Ni&ntilde;o and La Ni&ntilde;a events. J. Climate 11, 2863-2880.
Held, I. M., M. Ting and H. Wang, 2002. Northern winter stationary waves: Theory and Modeling.
J.Climate 15, 2125-2144.
Hoerling, M. P. andA. Kumar, 2002.Atmosphere response patterns associated with tropical forcing.
J. Climate 15, 2184-2203.
Hoerling, M. P. and A. Kumar, 2000. Understanding and predicting extratropical teleconnections
related to ENSO. El Ni&ntilde;o and the Southern Oscillation: Multiscale variability and global
and regional impacts. Ed. Henry F. Diaz e Vera Markgraf, Cambridge Press, 57-88.
Hoerling, M. P. andA. Kumar, 1997. Why do NorthAmerican climate anomalies differ from one El
Ni&ntilde;o event to another? Geoph. Res. Letters 24, 1059-1062.
Hoerling, M. P., A. Kumar and M. Zhong, 1997. El Ni&ntilde;o, La Ni&ntilde;a, and the nonlinearity of their
teleconnections. J. Climate 10, 1769-1786.
Hoerling, M. P., M. Ting and A. Kumar, 1995. Zonal flow-stationary wave relationship during El
Ni&ntilde;o: Implications for seasonl forecasting. J. Climate, 8, 1838-1852.
Hoerling, M. P., M. L. Blackmon, and M. Ting, 1992. Simulating the atmospheric response to the
1985-87 El Ni&ntilde;o Cycle. J. Climate 5, 669-681.
Holton, J. R., 1992. An introduction to Dynamic Meteorology. Academic Press, 3ed., 511 p.
Horel, J. D. and J. M. Wallace, 1981. Planetary scale atmospheric phenomena associated with the
Southern Oscillation. Mon. Wea. Rev. 109, 813-829.
Hoskins, B. J. and D. Karoly, 1981. The steady linear response of a spherical atmosphere to
thermal and orographic forcing. J. Atmos. Sci. 38, 1179-1196.
Hoskins, B.J. andA.J. Simmons, 1975.Amulti-layer spectral model and the semi-implicit method.
Q. J .R. Meteorol. Soc. 101, 637-655.
Hoskins, B.J., I. Draghici, and H.C. Davies, 1978. A new look at the ww-equation. Quart. J. R.
Met. Soc. 104, 31-38.
Hoskins, B.J., and T.Ambrizzi, 1993. Rossby wave propagation on a realistic longitudinally varying
flow. J. Atmos. Sci. 50, 1661-1671.
Hsu, H. H. and S.-H. Lin, 1992. Global teleconnections in the 250mb streamfunction field during
the Northern Hemisphere winter. Mon.Wea.Rev. 120, 1169-1190.
Jin, F. F. and B. J. Hoskins, 1995. The direct response to tropical heating in a baroclinic atmosphere.
J.Atmos.Sci. 52, 307-319.
Kalnay, E., M. Kanamitsu, R. Kistler, W. Collins, D. Deaven, L. Gandin, M. Iredell, S. Saha, G.
White, J. Woollen, Y. Zhu, M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki, W. Higgins, J. Janowiak, K.C. Mo, C.
Ropelewski, J. Wang, A. Leetmaa, R. Reynolds, R. Jenne, and D. Joseph, 1996. The NCEP/
NCAR 40-year Reanalysis Project. Bull.Amer. Meteor. Soc. 77, 437-471.
Kang, I. S. and N.-C. Lau, 1986. Principal modes of atmospheric variability in model atmospheres
with and without sea surface temperature forcing in the tropical Pacific. J. Atmos. Sci. 43,
2719-2735.
Karoly, D. J., 1983. Rossby wave propagation in a barotropic atmosphere. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans.
7, 111-125.
Kousky V. E., M. T. Kayano, and I. F. A Cavalcanti, 1984. A review of the Southern Oscillation:
oceanic-atmospheric circulation changes and related rainfall anomalies. Tellus, 36A, 490-504.
Kousky,V. E., and C. F. Ropelewski, 1989. Extremes in the Southern Oscillation and their relationship
to precipitation anomalies with emphasis on the South American region. Rev. Bras. Meteo. 4,
351-363.
Kumar,A., and M. P. Hoerling, 1997. Interpretation and implications of the observed inter-El Ni&ntilde;o
variability. J. Climate 10, 83-91.
Kumar, A., and M. P. Hoerling, 1995. Prospects and limitations of seasonal atmospheric GCM
predictions. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 76, 335-345.
Li, L., and T. R. Nathan, 1994. The global atmospheric response to low-frequency tropical forcing:
Zonally averaged basic states. J. Atmos. Sci. 51, 3412-3426.
Liebmann, B, 1987. Observed relationships between Large-Scale tropical convection and the tropi-
cal circulation on subseasonal time scales during Northern Hemisphere Winter. J. Atmos. Sci.
44, 2543-2561.
Liebmann, B., and C.A. Smith, 1996. Description of a complete (interpolated) outgoing longwave
radiation data set. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc. 77, 1275-1277.
Maga&ntilde;a, V., and A. I. Quintanar, 1997. On the use of General Circulation Models to study regional
climate. Proceedings of the Second UNAM-CRAY Supercomputing Conference, 39-48,
Cambridge University Press.
Maga&ntilde;a, V. and C. Conde, 2003. Climate variability and climate change and their impacts on the
freshwater resources in the border region: A case study for Sonora, Mexico. Climate and
water-transboundary challenges in the Americas, Henry F. Diaz and Barbara S. Morehouse
Editors, 373-393.
Mechoso,C.R.,A.Kitoh,S.MoorthiandA.Arakawa,1987.Numericalsimulationsoftheatmospheric
response to a sea surface temperature anomaly over the equatorial eastern Pacific Ocean.
Mon. Wea. Rev. 115, 2936-2956.
Mo, K. C., 2000. Relationship between low-frequency variability in the Southern Hemisphere and
sea surface temperature anomalies. J. Climate 13, 3599-3610.
Nigam, S., C. Chung, and E. DeWeaver, 2000. ENSO diabatic heating in ECMWF and NCEP-
NCAR reanalyses, and NCAR CCM3 simulation. J. Climate 13, 3152-3171.
Pisciottano, G., A. D&iacute;az, G. Cazes, and C. R. Mechoso, 1994. El Ni&ntilde;o-Southern Oscillation impact
on rainfall in Uruguay. J. Climate 7, 1286-1302.
Rao, V. B. and K. Hada, 1990. Characteristics of rainfall over Brazil: Annual variations and
connections with the Southern Oscillation. Theor. and App.Climat. 42, 81-91.
Reynolds, R. W., and M. S. Smith, 1994. Improved global sea surface temperature analysis using
optimum interpolation. J. Climate 7, 929-948.
Ropelewski, C. F., and M. S. Halpert, 1987. Global and regional scale precipitation patterns associated
with the El Ni&ntilde;o/Southern Oscillation. Mon. Wea. Rev., 115, 1606-1626.
Ting, M., and P. D. Sardeshmukh, 1993. Factor determining the extratropical response to equatorial
diabatic heating anomalies. J. Atmos. Sci. 50, 907-918.
Ting, M., and M. P. Hoerling, 1993. The dynamics of stationary wave anomalies during the 1986/87
El Ni&ntilde;o. Climate. Dyn. 9, 147-164.
Ting, M., M. P. Hoerling, T. Xu, andA. Kumar, 1996. Northern Hemisphere teleconnection patterns
during extreme phases of the zonal-mean circulation. J. Climate 9, 2614-2632.
Ting, M., and L.Yu, 1998. Steady response to tropical heating in wavy linear and nonlinear baroclinic
models. J. Atmos. Sci. 55, 3565-3582.
Trenberth, K. E., 1998. Development and forecasts of the 1997/98 El Ni&ntilde;o: CLIVAR Scientific
Issues. CLIVAR-Exchanges 3, No. 2/3, 4-14.
Xie, P., and P. A. Arkin, 1996. Analysis of global monthly precipitation using gauge observations,
satellite estimates and numerical model predictions. J. Climate 9, 840-858.
Yang, G. Y., and B. J. Hoskins, 1996. Propagation of Rossby waves of nonzero frequency.
J.Atmos.Sci. 53, 2365-2378.
Webster, P. J., 1994. The role of hydrological processes in the atmosphere. Rev. Geophys. 32, 427-
476.
